This is Deborah Beale, and I am interviewing Mr.
Lewis Horn on the history of the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. The date is June 13, 1984.
Introduction in here as to who you are, but I'd like
to get a little background on you as to education
and how you first came to A&M. Oh, I do want that on
here. Yeah.
I'm a graduate of Kansas State University in
industrial journalism, and I've done this
graduate work in industrial education there. I
worked for Beach Aircraft during the war years,
World War II, that is. and for Boeing Aircraft
Company. I was a tool engineer for Leach Aircraft
and an engineer project for Boeing.
Then I joined Buckminster Fuller, who was just
getting underway with his
preformed house circular house that was made of
metals you know aluminum and plastic and
things of that kind and used a circular form to give
structure and the whole house was fastened from a
pole by cables and tension rings that gave shape to
the house. And I did the technical writing work
that boosted that information out to the public,
the magazines, Fortune, Architectural Record,
Architectural Forum, and then all the magazines
of the various industries and the like metal field
or in the plastics field that would be concerned
with this design. Are you interested in all that
background? Oh, sure. Oh, okay. Anyway,
Buckminster Fuller felt that since everybody
needed housing at the end of World War II, that this
was a quick way of giving housing by utilizing all
the machinery in the industrial plants
that was already set up and the reservoirs of
workmen were already around and letting them use
the light metals and all the kind of aircraft
technology, aircraft manufacturing technology
to make the parts for his circular preformed house
and
so it was all geared for that so that the great big
cylinder, several great big cylinders would be
hauled in trucks to erection sites and could be set
up by mechanics
rather than carpenters in just a few days time,
whereas a conventional house took many months to
build. How did you come to be at A&M? How did I come to
A&M? Oh, pardon me. Then I went to the University of
Florida and I was, I did the publishing and
information work for them in the engineering
experiment station there, University of Florida
College of Engineering. And I was there two years,
then came to Texas A&M and went to work for Dean H.W.
Barlow, who is the Dean of the College of
Engineering Do you remember what year that was?
Yes, ma'am. August 1st, 1948.
So then I published the reports. We called them
bulletins in those days. And later we had a
research report series, then a leaflet series,
then a reprint series. Slick Paper Magazine,
Portland Magazine, Texas Engineering
Experiment Station News.
With regard to publishing the bulletins, the
legislature in setting up the Engineering
Experiment Station wanted engineering
information that came from research to be sent
over the state as widely as possible. So in those
days, that was one of the major functions of the
engineering experiment station, to disseminate
information. And that is stated in the documents
that set up the engineering experiment station.
Now, did you have a mailing list for those? Yes. As I
recall, the mailing list included many of our
libraries of the state, where the material would
always be available, and the libraries, the
public libraries, the big cities, and then we had
governmental agencies on the mailing list too,
and even smaller libraries over the state then we
the state also traded its publications with those
other agencies in other states and in other words
many copies were used for exchange purposes we did
that for quite a number of years then
farther along the way in engine-age trimmer
station. Apparently this money was not
forthcoming for sending these things out all
over, so we just somewhat can, you know, revise our
mailing list and send them out not so widely.
and depended on the public writing in its
documents. That was when you were saying at the
news, which said what the new documents were. Yes,
yes, we reviewed them in the magazine.
Did all they have were the bulletins when you came,
right? Yes, ma'am. Whose idea was it to start the
newsletter, that little in-house? It was Dr.
Mello's idea. to have a newsletter, and I believe
it was in mimeograph form at the time. And he sent
that out for several years. And in 1950, I
established the Texas Engineering Experiment
Station News. So after we were underway with that
for several years, And he decided to discontinue
the mimeograph newsletter because he thought our
magazine was doing the same job and it's just
wrong. But the glossy news was your idea? Yes,
ma'am. And did you have a lot of trouble getting it
back? Or did you just, did they say take it and run
with it? Oh, you mean get it reviewed? Or get the
money to start it? We used local funds for that, and
we never had any problems. That was Dr. Mello's
idea. He thought that out very wisely. He decided
that there would be fewer strings attached if we
just used our local money. And in those days, we
made money from fan tests, which we did for outside
concerns.
made money in other ways. I can't remember all the
ways. And that all went into our local funds. And so
I was glad we had plenty of money there, so we were
able to publish this little magazine. Our
circulation was not great at first, but it went
worldwide. And we received nice comments on it.
With the magazine, it was our idea to emphasize
information, actually publishing
findings that could be used, not just making
announcements. telling about things that were
happening or are going to be. We actually have data
and information, useful information, in these
articles that the public could use, the research
public or the practicing engineer or others out
there in our circulation.
Anything? Am I all right here? Oh yeah, you're
doing good. You're giving me all sorts of... Was
there anyone in charge of publications before you
came? Who did that?
Mr. W.D. Scotts was in charge of publications, but
he also ran the fan testing laboratory. So he, but
he had no background really in it, did he? No, but he
did a good job publishing it. He just did the
bulletins? The bulletins, yes. So yours was a new
position when you came? Yes. And so it was, they
were... And when I came, Mr. Schultz devoted his
full time to the fan testing work. So they were
making a definite effort to try and increase
publications when they hired you and disseminate
some information. Yes ma'am. We put information
into the newspapers and magazines, journals,
write articles for journals. And I'd help the men
write articles for the technical journals. And
I'd write some myself. And it was just interesting
and fun to do all that. In 1958, I believe it was, you
wrote a historical piece for the news. I don't know
if you remember that piece or not. Yes, I remember
it. Was that your idea, or did someone ask you to do
the history? I can't remember anybody asking me. I
think it was my idea, yes. Was it easy to get access
to people at that time? to find out what their ideas
were? Because I noticed at the end, you said that
the push now is for outside funding. Oh, yes. You
could just walk in. You could just walk in. A fella
like myself could just walk into any laboratory.
And we were friends, and fellas would tell me
things. And sometimes I'd ask them to write
special things for me, and they would do it. They
were very cooperative, and I got interested in
their work, and I would write up their work, and he
would tell me all about it, and give me background
information, give me some of their data, and so on,
and it was fun to write up their material. You were
here when Rose was here. Aaron Rose, yes. Do you
remember when he left, and why he left? He was here
only one year. And I noticed,
I think he was, this is a little, this might be a
little bit of a guess. I think he was here from 1958
to 1959, along in there.
I don't know why he left, really. I didn't know if
you'd uncovered that in your? No. But he went to
California, but he later joined some corporation
out there, I think. But at the time he left, I don't
believe he had a job.
In the reprints, whose idea was it to reprint? The
technical articles that were printed in other
magazines? Yes, all right.
Men like to show that they're active in their
professions, so they write in their own technical
journals, technical journals of their societies
or the trades. And they would submit those
themselves, yes. And if they needed help in
preparing them or submitting them, why I would
help them.
They knew where they were going with those
articles. And quite often, you had researchers
that had theses or dissertations that they wanted
to turn into technical articles of those kinds.
And they would send those. to the journalists. If
they needed help in sending them, I would help
them. And that worked out fine. Then we decided to
buy reprints. So usually the technical
journalists would make us a low price for a
quantity of reprints, and we would buy them, and
I'd put a jacket on them. It seemed like it was a
green jacket with the title in it. And with the
Engineering Experiment Station name at the
bottom. And the date and so on. And we put a reprint
number on it. So that was the reprint series.
And what was the difference between the bulletin
and The technical report that came out that time?
Research report. Research report. Well...
Think about that one. Yeah, think about that.
But...
I think with...
I guess the research report was basically a report
on this particular project and what was found on
the project in the research work in the laboratory
or in the field. And so its findings were presented
in that format and for the specific audience it
intended to reach. which was other researchers
and practitioners of that field. The bulletins
sometimes were a little more general, you know,
covered a wider field, and they were on various
kinds of subjects. Some of them were rather
technical and specialized, but some were
of broader interest We even published
proceedings and the like in the bulletin series,
proceedings of conferences.
Along the lines of those proceedings, were those
conferences that were held by or sponsored at all
by TEAS, or did TEAS just publish these? No, I
believe most of those were sponsored by the
Engineering Experience Station.
I know they had all the highway conferences and
they'd list the Civil Engineering Department and
A&M, but they never did list TEAS on the bulletins.
Occasionally they would, but not always. And I
didn't know if that meant TEAS wasn't involved in
the actual...
That's a hard one to answer. I think,
like you've indicated, that sometimes a group,
like maybe in chemical engineering, had a
conference and they wanted somebody to help them
publish it. And since we had organized facilities
for publishing, I think sometimes those came into
our bulletin series. And now the highway
publications from the civil engineering
department
really belonged with us because some of the
earliest research in the engineering experiment
station involved the highways. That was before
there was even a highway department in Texas. And
we had bulletins on the earth roads and sand clay
roads and building the various kind of bridges on
these country roads.
In those days the counties built the roads and then
some years later Probably five or six years after
the Engineering Experiment Station became
active,
Texas established the Texas Highway Department.
So then you had regular highway engineers working
with the roads and you had a state budget and so on.
But before, they were built by the counties. TTI
was a division of TEAS until this last couple of
years, according to TEAS, but it's also been
listed for years and years as a separate section of
the system, the university system. So what was the
actual relationship between
them?
I hope somebody doesn't take offense in
administration or anything I say, because I might
not be too accurate. But the way I looked at it, we
were established by the legislature. The
groundwork was laid in 1950.
But it was 1955 before we had actually had
laboratories and desks in the Texas
Transportation Institute. And I remember
helping TTI out as a publisher. I did some of their
work free before
they got underway too well. research projects and
needed somebody to help them publish, and I helped
them publish some of the early reports. Then
later,
Texas Transportation Institute materials were
published by the
Texas Engineering Experiment Station. You know,
through the organization of the Texas
Engineering Experiment Station, but under their
own format. And I was on one third time with the
Texas Transportation Institute.
We, the Texas Transportation Institute at that
time, I believe,
began handling its money through the Inchenang
Experiment Station facilities. You know, it
actually handled its money through the Inchenang
Experiment Station setup. And this went on for a
lot of years, and then it helped into just a few
years ago. But somewhere along the line, Quite a
good many years ago, the Texas Transportation
Institute was considered to be one of the units of
the system.
But when they would go over to the legislature,
they'd go over alongside of the engineering
experiment station. So it was really financial
that was the only connection? Yes, the financial
setup was handled in coordination with the
engineering experience station. With the
engineering experience station, I think,
supervising on that. When Rudder became
president, all sorts of things changed here at the
university.
What kind of impact did that have on your job? On my
job? Yeah, on your job. No. Absolutely not. He was a
fine gentleman, a very good friend, yes. What led
to the end of the publications in 1963? 53? 63. 63,
yes.
Dr. Winerdi, R. E. Winerdi, was associate
director of the Engineering Experiment Station
at that time, and he decided he wanted to
discontinue the Texas Transportation
Institute, I mean the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station News, and maybe have an annual
publication of some kind, similar to a very
colorful annual report. So he asked me to
discontinue the news, and of course I did. And
I think about a year later, I was transferred to the
Texas Transportation Institute, and it was to
give me more opportunities.
That meant salary-wise. And so
Dean Benson enabled me to make a move to the
Transportation Institute, which I had been with
on one-third time all along.
And this put me with the Transportation Institute
full time. By that time, the Transportation
Institute and become a full-blown foreign
musician. And
I immediately started a magazine with them, the
Texas Transportation Researcher. And this goes
worldwide. We started that in 1965.
I feel that it's helped the Institute a lot in
getting recognition with technologists and
business people and governmental people all over
the world and especially in our country.
very interesting correspondence from people we
reach. And there's an associate dean at the
University of Puerto Rico, wrote me a year or two
ago. He says, I've been receiving your
publication for 15 years, and I want to thank you
for this fine publication and the fine work that
you're doing. He was so pleased that we made A&M's
work known to him. When you left to go to TTI, they
didn't replace you, did they? Well, the first man,
I guess they brought somebody in to do the work.
They needed somebody to do the work. Well, they
didn't publish anything for the next 10 years from
us.
An English professor, an assistant professor in
English, handled the publications on a part-time
basis, and I think he had secretarial help. Then
a young man came in and he did that for several
years.
Oh, let's see, I'll turn it on. He had been a printer
in Bryan, ran a printing firm there.
He ran the operation for several years, and then a
man by the name of Jay Saul came in, and he handled
the information and publishing for the Texas
Extension Experiment Station. Is that when they
started up the technical bulletin? Yes, ma'am.
That was his. All they really published for those
10 years after you left were the reports they'd
send to NASA or to whoever they were doing research
for. Yes. And it drives you crazy trying to find the
history when you have to go back and there's
nothing there. That's one reason I'm doing the
interviews is to try and fill in some of those gaps.
Was the printing done here on campus? Yes, ma'am.
So you did the whole setup? Yes, ma'am. And did you
work with anyone outside of the A&M system in terms
of? I know you were involved in conferences,
because I read several times you presented papers
on technical publications and that type of thing.
Were those professional conferences you'd go to?
Give me your exact question again. I read an
article that you had presented a paper on the
publication of technical reports or something
along that line at a conference. Oh, yes. And did
you get to go to a lot of those conferences?
I guess I could have gone. I didn't go to too many. I
didn't know if this was something you got to do all
the time or if this was just... I didn't do too much
of that, no. Oh, yeah, I remember now. That was with
the American College Public Relations
Association and organizations at that time. I
went to some of those conferences, and when asked
to, I presented a paper, but I didn't do too much of
that. When
TEAS became, or when A&M became a system, You were
here then. Yes, ma'am. And did that really change
anything, the way things worked? No.
You know, down here at this level, you just do your
work and you just kept the work going regardless of
what was happening in administration.
You made this known in your publications
with the masthead and things like that, that the
organization had changed a little. And there
would be news stories in there about a chancellor
that had been appointed and so on.
But it never affected the work. I guess in science
and engineering You
always have this work to do. And other things don't
affect it very much. How about changes in
directors of teas? Did that affect you much? Not
too much. I got along with all of them, yes. Did they
all pretty much leave you alone to get your work
done? Yes, ma'am. I mean, they seemed to
appreciate what I was doing and let me do it my way.
I've always appreciated that on the part of my
superiors. They always let me do what I needed to
do. Once in a while, you know, they would point out
something that they knew I'd be doing or covering
and so on. And I was always glad to do that. When they
brought in the big push for the Nuclear Science
Center and all that, I noticed for quite a few
months you had lots of publications on what a
nuclear reactor does and all this type of thing.
Was that part of a big publicity push by the
university? Yes, ma'am.
At that time, I was also writing all the big
proposals for engineering experimentation. And
we kind of had a little corner on the proposal
business because we had the facilities. I helped
write the proposal for the Nuclear Science Center
and even helped the physics department with the
proposal for the cyclotron, for the engineering
experiment station. And with our data processing
facilities, we got the first building and then we
got an expansion. We expanded the plant later on.
And all along, like with the data processing, we
kept going to better machines. We started out with
650 way back. Then we'd go to bigger machines
until we ended up with this great big one now.
It's a nuclear science center, data processing
center,
cyclotron.
Like with the Nuclear Science Center, we'd help
researchers in agriculture and other fields at
A&M to write proposals
for money because they would be using our
facilities and we'd help them with the proposals.
So I'd be asking for the right things so they would
be presenting their best program to those people
that would be doing the financing.
And at one time, I had a whole side of a wall of
shelves filled with data sheets on almost every
scientist at A&M. You could have the data sheet
there, pull it down to put in the proposal. Sounds
like a good idea. Yeah. And then also, sometimes
the men would get so busy after they
got their nuclear science, got their, you
know,
reactor, they forget to write these quarterly
reports that were required by the agency in
Washington. And I'd help them write those, you
know.
Kind of fill in the detail a little bit, yeah. Go in
with the questions and say, okay, now I've got to
fill in this blank here and this blank here. What's
the answer? Well, mostly you wrote paragraphs on
it. what you did and how you were using the
facility. So you'd go chasing them around the
facility as they were working, saying, okay, now
tell me this. Yeah, and they would, yes, and they
would, the men would approve those and send them in
to Washington,
yes. Now,
I noticed that towards the end of the 50s, more and
more articles were being written on the highway
research in there. Was this a result of a big growth
in TTI's activities in the late 50s? Because they
were established in 55. Yes ma'am. And did it take
them a couple of years to really get going? We went
with smaller programs at first and the highway
department
kept building the budgets for us and it took years
to develop the budgets that we know nowadays and
then somewhere along the line there was interest
in the in the regional highway program and a lot of
research that was done by TTI had application in
the inter-regional highway program. And we took
years to build that. I
guess it's in the late 50s, we started getting into
the highway safety field and began building
things to make the highways safer, especially
safer when collisions were involved and one of our
first breaks was to develop a breakaway signpost
and that idea is still used today and we still do
breakaway research for the Federal Highway
Administration and we do research to soften the
impact of vehicles striking solid objects or any
kind of objects.
So we have done a lot of work with impact and
attenuation devices.
How did the energy crisis in the mid-70s affect
TTI's research?
Well... Or did it?
You were...
It affected it, all right, but I... You know, our
people were always energy. conscious especially
our economists and planners and they would their
studies involved economics of
highway operations and so on even like with
highway materials you were concerned about the
energy costs of bringing aggregates from way off
to a highway site
and so on. And you started doing research to
provide
for aggregates to be used that were close at hand by
thoroughly testing those lesser aggregates that
weren't quite as satisfactory as those that we
were hauling from farther away, and trying to
determine whether you could actually use those,
and under what conditions and so on, and what you
needed to do to them. So we were energy conscious in
all our research, yes. How did you get involved in
Mr. Cotton's history of engineering? Because you
wrote the chapter on teas. Oh, Professor
Crawford's book. Yeah, Crawford, sorry. Oh, he
just asked me to write those two chapters. He knew
who it was and would know it, huh? Yes. Did it take a
lot of digging, or did you pretty much remember?
No, most of it I had my fingertips from working with
the agencies through the years.
Did you notice while you were working there a focus
in the direction TEAS was going? Any change in that
focus? The way TEAS was going? You know, the types
of research they did?
Well,
there were various kinds of new interests always
being established, and you would establish a
center for that type of interest. And that is so you
could deal with the outsiders a little better.
They could find you in the maze of laboratories and
people that was A&M. And by having a center, those
people could find you a lot easier. but many of
those centers started after I went over to the
Institute. Do you remember a time period that you
helped write proposals for grants and things? Do
you remember a time that you felt like you were
absolutely deluged with people wanting you to
help them write grants and that type of thing? Was
it any different than usual? Well, the man himself
would... initiate the proposal, and most of the
time you were just helping him. You were helping
him with what he needed to do that. And so, I didn't
mean to give the impression that I was writing all
the proposals. Now the big ones, or the big
facilities, a lot of people would write that. I
wrecked those and I had a party in that. Were there
any really big ones like those before the
cyclotron and that type of thing? No.
Up into the 60s, the Research Foundation, which
handled those proposals, was a very small
organization, just a few people. The Research
Foundation was started by Dr. A. A. Jakula way
back, and he just had a secretary. And then they
moved up into the System Building, and there were,
there was a director and a business officer, and
then there were several secretaries, and then
They added people, but the big,